Add contributing guide and adding a new runtime docs (#36)
open-runtimes/open-runtimes: docs/add-runtime.md

### 1.1 Fork the Open Runtimes repository

Before making any changes, you will need to fork Open Runtimes's repository to keep branches on the official repo clean. To do that, visit [Open Runtimes's Runtime repository](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes) and click on the fork button.

[![Fork button](https://github.com/appwrite/appwrite/raw/master/docs/tutorials/images/fork.png)](https://github.com/appwrite/appwrite/blob/master/docs/tutorials/images/fork.png)

This will redirect you from `github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes` to `github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/open-runtimes`, meaning all changes you do are only done inside your repository. Once you are there, click the highlighted `Code` button, copy the URL and clone the repository to your computer using the `git clone` command:
```bash
$ git clone COPIED_URL
```

> To fork a repository, you will need a basic understanding of CLI and git-cli binaries installed. If you are a beginner, we recommend you to use `Github Desktop`. It is a clean and simple visual Git client.

> Finally, you will need to create a `feat-XXX-YYY-runtime` branch based on the `refactor` branch and switch to it. The `XXX` should represent the issue ID and `YYY` the runtime name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, you will need to create a `feat-XXX-YYY-runtime` branch from the `main` branch and switch to it. The `XXX` should represent the issue ID and `YYY` the runtime name.
```

```

### 2.2 Differences between compiled and interpreted runtimes
Runtimes within Open Runtimes are created differently depending on whether they are compiled or interpreted. This is due to the fundamental differences between the two ways of running the code.

Interpreted languages have both a `build.sh` file and a `start.sh` file.
The `build.sh` file for an interpreted runtime is normally used for installing any dependencies for both the server itself and the user's code and then to copy it to the `/usr/code` folder which is then packaged and can be used later for running the server.
The build script is always executed during the build stage of a function deployment.

The `start.sh` file for an interpreted runtime should extract the `/tmp/code.tar.gz` file that contains both the user's code and the dependencies. This tarball was created by Open Runtimes from the `/usr/code` folder and should install the dependencies that were pre-installed by the build stage and move them into the relevant locations for that runtime. It will then run the server ready for execution.

---

> The `build.sh` script for a compiled runtime is used to move the user's source code and rename it into source files for the runtime (The `INTERNAL_RUNTIME_ENTRYPOINT` environment variable can help with this) it will also build the code and move it into the `/usr/code` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `build.sh` script for a compiled runtime is used to move the user's source code and rename it into source files for the runtime (The `INTERNAL_RUNTIME_ENTRYPOINT` environment variable can help with this). It will also build the code and move it into the `/usr/code` folder.
```

    "message": "Error: Tried to divide by 0 \n /usr/code/index.js:80:7", // (String) Try to return a stacktrace and detailed error message if possible. This is shown to the user.
}
```

### 2.5 Writing your Dockerfile
The Dockerfile is very important as it's the environment you are creating to run build the runtime and also run the code if you are writing an interpreted runtime (compiled runtimes will use an `alpine` or `ubuntu` image to run the compiled executable.)

The first thing you need to do is find a Docker image to base your runtime off. You can find these at [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com). If possible try to use verified official builds of the language you are creating a runtime for.

Next in your Dockerfile at the start, add the Docker image you want to base it off at the top like so:
```bash
FROM Dart:2.12 # Dart is used as an example.
```
This will download and require the image when you build your runtime and allow you to use the toolset of the language you are building a runtime for.

Create the folders you will use in your build step:
```bash
RUN mkdir -p /usr/local/src/
RUN mkdir -p /usr/code
RUN mkdir -p /usr/workspace

> RUN mkdir -p /usr/builtCode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN mkdir -p /usr/builds
```

```

Next copy your source code and set the working directory for the image like so:
```
WORKDIR /usr/local/src

> COPY . /usr/local/src

Reviewer: ```suggestion
COPY . .
```
We're currently using this in all the docker files

```

Next, you want to make sure you are adding execute permissions to any scripts you may run, the main ones are `build.sh` and `start.sh`. You can run commands in Dockerfile's using the `RUN` prefix like so:
```
RUN chmod +x ./build.sh
RUN chmod +x ./start.sh
```

If needed use the `RUN` commands to install any dependencies you require for the build stage.

Finally, you'll add a `CMD` command. this should be:
```
CMD ["/usr/local/src/start.sh"]
```
Since this will use your launch script when the runtime starts.

## 3. Building your Docker image and adding it to the list
With your runtime successfully created you can now move on to building your Docker image and adding it to the script files used for generating all of the image files.

> Open up the `./build.sh` script first and add your runtime to it. The following is an example with dart version 2.12

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open up the `./build.sh` script at the root of the project and add your runtime to it. The following is an example with dart version 2.12
```

The first line is creating a new language entry, The first parameter is the internal name and the second one is the external one which is what the user will see in projects that use Open Runtimes such as Appwrite.

The second line adds a new version to the language entry, I'll break down the parameters:
```
1: Version - The version of the runtime you are creating.
2: Build Image - The image used to build the code
3: Run Image - The image used to run the code. 
For interpreted languages, this is normally the same as the Build Image, but for compiled languages, this can be either "openruntimes-alpine:3.13.6" or "openruntimes-ubuntu:20.04"
We recommend using Alpine when possible and using Ubuntu if the runtime doesn't work on Alpine.
4: Platforms Supported - These are the architectures this runtime is available to.
```
The third line simply adds the new runtime to the main list. -->

## 4. Adding tests

### 4.1 Creating your test script
Create a new folder in `./tests` and name it the same name as the folder where you placed your runtime code. For example, if you are creating a runtime for dart 2.12 you would name it `dart-2.12`.

> Next create a new PHP file in the `./tests` folder again and name it the name of your language followed by it's version with **no dots and no spaces**. For example, if you are creating a runtime for dart 2.12 you would name it `dart212.php`. Within this PHP file you will place the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next create a new PHP file in the `./tests` folder and name it by your language followed by it's version with **no dots and no spaces**. For example, if you are creating a runtime for dart 2.12 you would name it `dart212.php`. Within this PHP file you will place the following code:
```

# Creating a new functions runtime 🏃

> This document is part of the OpenRuntimes contributors' guide. Before you continue reading this document make sure you have read the [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) and the [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document is part of the Open Runtimes contributors' guide. Before you continue reading this document make sure you have read the [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) and the [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).
```

## 1. Prerequisites

> For a runtime to work, two prerequisites **must** be met due to the way OpenRuntime's Runtime Execution Model works:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a runtime to work, two prerequisites **must** be met due to the way Open Runtimes's Runtime Execution Model works:
```

 - [ ] The Language in question must be able to run a web server that can serve JSON and text.
 - [ ] The Runtime must be able to be packaged into a Docker container
 

>  Note: Both Compiled and Interpreted languages work with OpenRuntime's execution model but are written in slightly different ways.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Note: Both Compiled and Interpreted languages work with Open Runtimes's execution model but are written in slightly different ways.
```

> It's really easy to contribute to an open-source project, but when using GitHub, there are a few steps we need to follow. This section will take you step-by-step through the process of preparing your local version of OpenRuntimes, where you can make any changes without affecting OpenRuntimes right away.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's really easy to contribute to an open-source project, but when using GitHub, there are a few steps we need to follow. This section will take you step-by-step through the process of preparing your local version of Open Runtimes, where you can make any changes without affecting Open Runtimes right away.
```

> > If you are experienced with GitHub or have made a pull request before, you can skip to [Implement new runtime](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/docs/tutorials/add-runtime.md#2-implement-new-runtime).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

> If you are experienced with GitHub or have made a pull request before, you can skip to [Implement new runtime](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/docs/tutorials/add-runtime.md#2-implement-new-runtime).
```

> ### 1.1 Fork the OpenRuntimes repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 1.1 Fork the Open Runtimes repository
```

> Before making any changes, you will need to fork OpenRuntimes's repository to keep branches on the official repo clean. To do that, visit [OpenRuntimes's Runtime repository](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes) and click on the fork button.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before making any changes, you will need to fork Open Runtimes's repository to keep branches on the official repo clean. To do that, visit [Open Runtimes's Runtime repository](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes) and click on the fork button.
```

> [![Fork button](https://github.com/appwrite/appwrite/raw/master/docs/tutorials/images/fork.png)](https://github.com/appwrite/appwrite/blob/master/docs/tutorials/images/fork.png)

Reviewer 3: Refference to Appwrite repo. We should decouple.

This will redirect you from `github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes` to `github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/open-runtimes`, meaning all changes you do are only done inside your repository. Once you are there, click the highlighted `Code` button, copy the URL and clone the repository to your computer using the `git clone` command:
```bash
$ git clone COPIED_URL
```

> To fork a repository, you will need a basic understanding of CLI and git-cli binaries installed. If you are a beginner, we recommend you to use `Github Desktop`. It is a clean and simple visual Git client.

Finally, you will need to create a `feat-XXX-YYY-runtime` branch based on the `refactor` branch and switch to it. The `XXX` should represent the issue ID and `YYY` the runtime name.

## 2. Implement new runtime

### 2.1 Preparing the files for your new runtime
The first step to writing a new runtime is to create a folder within `/runtimes` with the name of the runtime and the version separated by a dash. For instance, if I was to write a Rust Runtime with version 1.55 the folder name would be: `rust-1.55`

> Within that folder you will need to create a few basic files that all OpenRuntimes runtimes require:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within that folder you will need to create a few basic files that all Open Runtimes runtimes require:
```

```
Dockerfile - Dockerfile that explains how the container will be built.
README.md - A readme file explaining the runtime and any special notes for the runtime. A good example of this is the PHP 8.0 runtime.
```

### 2.2 Differences between compiled and interpreted runtimes

> Runtimes within OpenRuntimes are created differently depending on whether they are compiled or interpreted. This is due to the fundamental differences between the two ways of running the code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Runtimes within Open Runtimes are created differently depending on whether they are compiled or interpreted. This is due to the fundamental differences between the two ways of running the code.
```

Interpreted languages have both a `build.sh` file and a `start.sh` file.
The `build.sh` file for an interpreted runtime is normally used for installing any dependencies for both the server itself and the user's code and then to copy it to the `/usr/code` folder which is then packaged and can be used later for running the server.
The build script is always executed during the build stage of a function deployment.

> The `start.sh` file for an interpreted runtime should extract the `/tmp/code.tar.gz` file that contains both the user's code and the dependencies. This tarball was created by OpenRuntimes from the `/usr/code` folder and should install the dependencies that were pre-installed by the build stage and move them into the relevant locations for that runtime. It will then run the server ready for execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `start.sh` file for an interpreted runtime should extract the `/tmp/code.tar.gz` file that contains both the user's code and the dependencies. This tarball was created by Open Runtimes from the `/usr/code` folder and should install the dependencies that were pre-installed by the build stage and move them into the relevant locations for that runtime. It will then run the server ready for execution.
```

#### Note:
`/tmp/code.tar.gz` is always created from the `/usr/code` folder as an output of the build stage. If you need any files for either compiled or interpreted runtimes you should place them there and extract them from the `/tmp/code.tar.gz` during the `start.sh` script to get the files you need.

### 2.3 Writing the runtime
Internally the runtime can be anything you like as long as it follows the standards set by the other runtimes.

The best way to go about writing a runtime is like so:
Initialize a web server that runs on port 3000 and binds to the 0.0.0.0 IP and on each `POST` request do the following:
1. Check that the `x-internal-challenge` header matches the `INTERNAL_RUNTIME_KEY` environment variable. If not return an error with a `401` status code and an `unauthorized` error message.
2. Decode the executor's JSON POST request. This normally looks like so:
```json
{
 "env": {
    "hello":"world!"
 },
 "payload":"An Example Payload",
 "timeout": 10
}
```

> `timeout` is also an optional parameter to deal with, if you can handle it please do. Otherwise, it doesn't matter since the connection will simply be dropped by the executor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`timeout` is also an optional parameter to deal with, if you can handle it, please do. Otherwise, it doesn't matter since the connection will simply be dropped by the executor.
```

You must create two classes for users to use within their scripts. A `Request` Class and a `Response` class
The `Request` class must store `env`, `payload` and `headers` and pass them to the user's function. 
The Request always goes before the response in the user's function parameters.
The `Response` class must have two functions. 
- A `send(string)` function which will return text to the request
- and a `json(object)` function which will return JSON to the request setting the appropriate headers

Please make sure to add appropriate checks to make sure the imported file is a function that you can execute.

1. Finally execute the function and handle whatever response the user's code returns. Try to wrap the function into a `try catch` statement to handle any errors the user's function encounters and return them cleanly to the executor with the error schema.

### 2.4 The Error Schema
All errors that occur during the execution of a user's function **MUST** be returned using this JSON Object otherwise OpenRuntimes will be unable to parse them for the user.

> ```json

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```json5
```

{
    "code": 500, // (Int) Use 404 if function not found or use 401 if the x-internal-challenge check failed.
    "message": "Error: Tried to divide by 0 \n /usr/code/index.js:80:7", // (String) Try to return a stacktrace and detailed error message if possible. This is shown to the user.
}
```

### 2.5 Writing your Dockerfile
The Dockerfile is very important as it's the environment you are creating to run build the runtime and also run the code if you are writing an interpreted runtime (compiled runtimes will use an `alpine` or `ubuntu` image to run the compiled executable.)

The first thing you need to do is find a Docker image to base your runtime off. You can find these at [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com). If possible try to use verified official builds of the language you are creating a runtime for.

> Next in your Dockerfile at the start add the docker image you want to base it off at the top like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next in your Dockerfile at the start, add the Docker image you want to base it off at the top like so:
```

```bash
FROM Dart:2.12 # Dart is used as an example.
```
This will download and require the image when you build your runtime and allow you to use the toolset of the language you are building a runtime for.

Create a user and group for the runtime, this user will be used to both build and run the code:
```bash
RUN groupadd -g 2000 openruntimes \
&& useradd -m -u 2001 -g openruntimes openruntimes
```

then create the folders you will use in your build step:
```bash
RUN mkdir -p /usr/local/src/
RUN mkdir -p /usr/code
RUN mkdir -p /usr/workspace
RUN mkdir -p /usr/builtCode
```

Next copy your source code and set the working directory for the image like so:
```
WORKDIR /usr/local/src
COPY . /usr/local/src
```

Next, you want to make sure you are adding execute permissions to any scripts you may run, the main ones are `build.sh` and `start.sh`. You can run commands in Dockerfile's using the `RUN` prefix like so:
```
RUN chmod +x ./build.sh

> RUN chmod +x ./start.sh

Reviewer 3: I think we should also talk about `prepare.sh`, and how we use it (for instance) in PHP. We should explain when it should be used.

Next set the permissions for the user you created so your build and run step will have access to them:
```
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/local/src"]
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/code"]
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/workspace"]
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/builtCode"]
```

Finally, you'll add a `CMD` command. For an interpreted language this should be:
```
CMD ["/usr/local/src/start.sh"]
```
Since this will use your launch script when the runtime starts.

For a compiled language this must be:
```
CMD ["tail", "-f", "/dev/null"]
```
so the build steps can be run.

## 3. Building your Docker image and adding it to the list
With your runtime successfully created you can now move on to building your Docker image and adding it to the script files used for generating all of the image files.

Open up the `/runtimes/buildLocalOnly.sh` script first and add your runtime to it. The following is an example with dart version 2.12
```
echo 'Dart 2.12...'
docker build -t openruntimes/dart:2.12 ./runtimes/dart-2.12
```

> Next, open up the `/runtimes/build.sh` script and also add your runtime to it. This one is slightly different as this is the one that will be used for cross-platform compiles and deploying it to Docker hub. The following is an example also with dart version 2.12:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, open up the `/runtimes/build.sh` script and also add your runtime to it. This one is slightly different as this is the one that will be used for cross-platform compiles and deploying it to Docker Hub. The following is an example also with Dart version 2.12:
```

```
echo  'Dart 2.12...'
docker buildx build --platform linux/amd64,linux/arm64 -t dart-runtime:2.12 ./runtimes/dart-2.12/ --push
```

## 4. Adding the runtime to the runtimes list
In `src/Runtimes/Runtimes` create a new entry in the `__construct()` method in the Runtimes class like so:
```
$dart = new Runtime('dart', 'Dart');
$dart->addVersion('2.12', 'dart-runtime:2.12', 'openruntimes-ubuntu:20.04', [System::X86, System::ARM]);
$this->runtimes['dart'] = $dart;
```
This is an example of what you would do for a compiled language such as dart.

> The first line is creating a new language entry, The first parameter is the internal name and the second one is the external one which is what the user will see in projects that use OpenRuntimes such as Appwrite.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first line is creating a new language entry, The first parameter is the internal name and the second one is the external one which is what the user will see in projects that use Open Runtimes such as Appwrite.
```

The second line adds a new version to the language entry, I'll break down the parameters:
```
1: Version - The version of the runtime you are creating.
2: Build Image - The image used to build the code
3: Run Image - The image used to run the code. 
For interpreted languages, this is normally the same as the Build Image, but for compiled languages, this can be either "openruntimes-alpine:3.13.6" or "openruntimes-ubuntu:20.04"
We recommend using Alpine when possible and using Ubuntu if the runtime doesn't work on Alpine.
4: Platforms Supported - These are the architectures this runtime is available to.
```
The third line simply adds the new runtime to the main list.

## 5. Adding tests

> ### 5.1 Writing your test execution script

Reviewer 3: Tests must have a specific structure. You need to create class that extends Base.. There needs to be comment section with instructions for testing (check out existing ones).

> ### 5.1 Writing your test execution script

Reviewer 3: We should expalin what exactly a script in test needs to do.. It must be using library for HTTP client (to test library functionality), use some payload input formated as JSON, and return specific set of keys. We should explain that, and also point to tests in Base.php to see what expected input and output are.

Adding tests for your runtime is simple, go into the `/tests/resources` folder and create a folder for the language you are creating then within the folder create a source code file for the language you are writing a runtime for as if you were creating a user function for your runtime. Within this user function you are writing all you need to do is return some JSON with the following schema:

> ```json

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```json5
```

{
    "normal": "Hello World!",
    "env1": request.env['ENV1'], // ENV1 from the request environment variable
    "payload": request.payload, // Payload from the request
}
```

> ### 5.2 Creating the test packaging script for your runtime

Reviewer 3: We dont need to package for tests.

Next create a shell script yourself with your language name. As an example, the shell script name for dart would be `package-dart.sh`

Within this newly created script copy-paste this script and replace all the `LANGUAGE_NAME` parts with your language's name
```
echo  'LANGUAGE_NAME Packaging...'
rm $(pwd)/tests/resources/LANGUAGE_NAME.tar.gz
tar -zcvf $(pwd)/tests/resources/LANGUAGE_NAME.tar.gz -C $(pwd)/tests/resources/LANGUAGE_NAME .
```
Then save this file. Then `cd` into the root of the `php-runtimes` project in a terminal. Run the following command replacing the `LANGUAGE_NAME` with your language's name:
```
chmod +x ./tests/resources/package-LANGUAGE_NAME.sh && ./tests/resources/package-LANGUAGE_NAME.sh
```
This command adds execution permissions to your script and executes it.

NOTE: If you ever want to repackage your script you can simply run: `./tests/resources/package-LANGUAGE_NAME.sh` in the root of the `php-runtimes` project since you don't have to change permissions more than once.

> ### 5.3 Adding your runtime to the main testing script

Reviewer 3: Tests work differently.

```php
'LANGUAGE_NAME-VERSION'  =>  [
    'code'  =>  $functionsDir .  ' /LANGUAGE_NAME.tar.gz',
    'entrypoint'  =>  'Test file', // Replace with the name of the test file you wrote in ./tests/resources/LANGUAGE_NAME
    'timeout'  =>  15,
    'runtime'  =>  'LANGUAGE_NAME-VERSION',
    'tarname'  =>  'LANGUAGE_NAME-VERSION.tar.gz', // Note: If your version has a point in it replace it with a dash instead for this value.
],
```
Make sure to replace all instances of `LANGUAGE_NAME` with your language's name and `VERSION` with your runtime's version.

Once you have done this and saved it, it is finally time to move onto one of the final steps.

### 5.4 Running the tests.
Running the tests is easy, simply run `docker-compose up` in the root of the `php-runtimes` folder. This will launch a Docker container with the test script and start running through all the runtimes making sure to test them thoroughly.

If all tests pass then congratulations! You can now go ahead and file a PR against the `php-runtimes` repo making sure to target the `refactor` branch, make sure you're ready to respond to any feedback which can arise during our code review.

## 6. Raise a pull request

> First of all, commit the changes with the message `Added XXX Runtime` and push it. This will publish a new branch to your forked version of OpenRuntimes. If you visit it at `github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/php-runtimes`, you will see a new alert saying you are ready to submit a pull request. Follow the steps GitHub provides, and at the end, you will have your pull request submitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First of all, commit the changes with the message `Added XXX Runtime` and push it. This will publish a new branch to your forked version of Open Runtimes. If you visit it at `github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/php-runtimes`, you will see a new alert saying you are ready to submit a pull request. Follow the steps GitHub provides, and at the end, you will have your pull request submitted.
```

> ## ![face_with_head_bandage](https://github.githubassets.com/images/icons/emoji/unicode/1f915.png) Stuck ?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##🤕 Stuck ?
```

> If you need any help with the contribution, feel free to head over to [our discord channel](https://appwrite.io/discord) and we'll be happy to help you out.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need any help with the contribution, feel free to head over to [our Discord channel](https://discord.gg/fP6W2qEzfQ) and we'll be happy to help you out.
```

> If you need any help with the contribution, feel free to head over to [our discord channel](https://appwrite.io/discord) and we'll be happy to help you out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need any help with the contribution, feel free to head over to [our Discord channel](https://appwrite.io/discord) and we'll be happy to help you out.
```

Reviewer 2: Should this be the Appwrite or the Open Runtimes Discord server?

# Creating a new functions runtime 🏃

> This document is part of the OpenRuntimes contributors' guide. Before you continue reading this document make sure you have read the [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) and the [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/open-runtimes/open-runtimes/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Reviewer: We dont have a code of conduct yet . Maybe you can add that

Reviewer 2: Shall I add the Code of Conduct?

Reviewer: Sure @adityaoberai  go ahead

Finally, you will need to create a `feat-XXX-YYY-runtime` branch based on the `refactor` branch and switch to it. The `XXX` should represent the issue ID and `YYY` the runtime name.

## 2. Implement new runtime

### 2.1 Preparing the files for your new runtime
The first step to writing a new runtime is to create a folder within `/runtimes` with the name of the runtime and the version separated by a dash. For instance, if I was to write a Rust Runtime with version 1.55 the folder name would be: `rust-1.55`

Within that folder you will need to create a few basic files that all OpenRuntimes runtimes require:
```
Dockerfile - Dockerfile that explains how the container will be built.
README.md - A readme file explaining the runtime and any special notes for the runtime. A good example of this is the PHP 8.0 runtime.
```

### 2.2 Differences between compiled and interpreted runtimes
Runtimes within OpenRuntimes are created differently depending on whether they are compiled or interpreted. This is due to the fundamental differences between the two ways of running the code.

> Interpreted languages have both a `build.sh` file and a `launch.sh` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interpreted languages have both a `build.sh` file and a `launch.sh` file.
```

We've renamed launch.sh to start.sh

The `build.sh` file for an interpreted runtime is normally used for installing any dependencies for both the server itself and the user's code and then to copy it to the `/usr/code` folder which is then packaged and can be used later for running the server.

> The build script is always executed during the build stage of tag deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build script is always executed during the build stage of a function deployment.
```

The `launch.sh` file for an interpreted runtime should extract the `/tmp/code.tar.gz` file that contains both the user's code and the dependencies. This tarball was created by OpenRuntimes from the `/usr/code` folder and should install the dependencies that were pre-installed by the build stage and move them into the relevant locations for that runtime. It will then run the server ready for execution.

---

> Compiled Languages only have a `build.sh` file.

Reviewer: I don't think this is accurate 🤔 . All our runtimes have both a `build.sh` and `start.sh`

Author: The compiled runtimes shouldn't have a `start.sh` since they use the alpine and ubuntu image to launch

> The `build.sh` script for a compiled runtime is used to move the user's source code and rename it into source files for the runtime (The `ENTRYPOINT_NAME` environment variable can help with this) it will also build the code and move it into the `/usr/code` folder. Compiled runtime executables **must** be called `runtime` for the ubuntu or alpine images to detect and run them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `build.sh` script for a compiled runtime is used to move the user's source code and rename it into source files for the runtime (The `INTERNAL_RUNTIME_ENTRYPOINT` environment variable can help with this) it will also build the code and move it into the `/usr/code` folder. Compiled runtime executables **must** be called `runtime` for the ubuntu or alpine images to detect and run them.
```

Reviewer: > Compiled runtime executables **must** be called `runtime` for the ubuntu or alpine images to detect and run them.

Not sure I understand the meaning of this ? Can you clarify ?

Author: Compiled runtimes are only used for build, once they are built we use an alpine or ubuntu image that we have created that will detect the runtime executable and launch it

#### Note:

> `/tmp/code.tar.gz` is always created from the `/usr/code` folder in the build stage. If you need any files for either compiled or interpreted runtimes you should place them there and extract them from the `/tmp/code.tar.gz` during the `launch.sh` script to get the files you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/tmp/code.tar.gz` is always created from the `/usr/code` folder as an output of the build stage. If you need any files for either compiled or interpreted runtimes you should place them there and extract them from the `/tmp/code.tar.gz` during the `start.sh` script to get the files you need.
```

### 2.3 Writing the runtime
Internally the runtime can be anything you like as long as it follows the standards set by the other runtimes.

The best way to go about writing a runtime is like so:

> Initialize a web server that runs on port 3000 and uses any IP Address (0.0.0.0) and on each `POST` request do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initialize a web server that runs on port 3000 and uses any IP Address (0.0.0.0) and on each `POST` request does the following:
```
I also dont think its okay to use any IP address. It has to be `0.0.0.0` I believe

Author: I'm not sure using "does" here is grammatically correct, it seems out of place reading it in my head

Reviewer: Oh my bad. Ignore the `does` comment. 👍  Check out the one about the server IP

Author: alright, addressed 👍

1. Check that the `x-internal-challenge` header matches the `INTERNAL_RUNTIME_KEY` environment variable. If not return an error with a `401` status code and an `unauthorized` error message.
2. Decode the executor's JSON POST request. This normally looks like so:
```json
{
 "path": "/usr/code",

>  "file": "index.js",

Reviewer: We're not passing `path` and `file` anymore. We're using environment variables for this

 "env": {
         "hello":"world!"
    },
 "payload":"An Example Payload",
 "timeout": 10
}
```

> For a compiled language you can disregard the `path` and `file` attribute if you like,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> `timeout` is also an optional parameter to deal with, if you can handle it please do. Otherwise, it doesn't matter since the connection will simply be dropped by the executor.

Reviewer: > if you can handle it please do.

You should make it mandatory for the developer to handle the timeout case if it is passed.

You must create two classes for users to use within their scripts. A `Request` Class and a `Response` class
The `Request` class must store `env`, `payload` and `headers` and pass them to the user's function. 
The Request always goes before the response in the user's function parameters.
The `Response` class must have two functions. 
- A `send(string)` function which will return text to the request

> - and a `json(object)` function which will return JSON to the request setting the appropriate headers

Reviewer: > You must create two classes for users to use within their scripts. A `Request` Class and a `Response` class

Not sure this is accurate . Not all of the runtimes use a Request and response class. Languages like JS just pass a native JS object with those properties.

> For interpreted languages use the `path` and `file` parameters to find the file and require it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We're not using these anymore. We get the entrypoint from an environment variable

Please make sure to add appropriate checks to make sure the imported file is a function that you can execute.

> 5. Finally execute the function and handle whatever response the user's code returns. Try to wrap the function into a `try catch` statement to handle any errors the user's function encounters and return them cleanly to the executor with the error schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Finally execute the function and handle whatever response the user's code returns. Wrap the function into a `try catch` statement to handle any errors the user's function encounters and return them cleanly to the executor with the error schema.
```

### 2.4 The Error Schema
All errors that occur during the execution of a user's function **MUST** be returned using this JSON Object otherwise OpenRuntimes will be unable to parse them for the user.
```json
{
    "code": 500, // (Int) Use 404 if function not found or use 401 if the x-internal-challenge check failed.
    "message": "Error: Tried to divide by 0 \n /usr/code/index.js:80:7", // (String) Try to return a stacktrace and detailed error message if possible. This is shown to the user.
}
```

### 2.5 Writing your Dockerfile

> The Dockerfile is very important as it's the environment you are creating to run build the runtime and also run the code if you are writing an Interpreted Runtime (Compiled runtimes will use an alpine or ubuntu image to run the compiled executable.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dockerfile is very important as it's the environment you are creating to run build the runtime and also run the code if you are writing an interpreted runtime (compiled runtimes will use an `alpine` or `ubuntu` image to run the compiled executable.)
```

I think you should stick to using lower case for runtime, interpreted, compiled across the guide. 
When used in `Open Runtimes`, it should be capitalised

> The first thing you need to do is find a docker image to base your runtime off, You can find these at [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com). If possible try to use verified official builds of the language you are creating a runtime for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing you need to do is find a Docker image to base your runtime off. You can find these at [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com). If possible try to use verified official builds of the language you are creating a runtime for.
```

Next in your Dockerfile at the start add the docker image you want to base it off at the top like so:
```bash
FROM Dart:2.12 # Dart is used as an example.
```
This will download and require the image when you build your runtime and allow you to use the toolset of the language you are building a runtime for.

Create a user and group for the runtime, this user will be used to both build and run the code:
```bash
RUN groupadd -g 2000 openruntimes \

> && useradd -m -u 2001 -g openruntimes openruntimes

Reviewer: We're not using this anymore. We're the root user.

```

then create the folders you will use in your build step:
```bash
RUN mkdir -p /usr/local/src/
RUN mkdir -p /usr/code
RUN mkdir -p /usr/workspace
RUN mkdir -p /usr/builtCode
```

Next copy your source code and set the working directory for the image like so:
```
WORKDIR /usr/local/src
COPY . /usr/local/src
```

> Next, you want to make sure you are adding execute permissions to any scripts you may run, the main ones are `build.sh` and `launch.sh`. You can run commands in Dockerfile's using the `RUN` prefix like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you want to make sure you are adding execute permissions to any scripts you may run, the main ones are `build.sh` and `start.sh`. You can run commands in Dockerfile's using the `RUN` prefix like so:
```

```
RUN chmod +x ./build.sh

> RUN chmod +x ./launch.sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN chmod +x ./start.sh
```

```

> Note: Do not chmod a `launch.sh` file if you don't have one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Do not chmod a `start.sh` file if you don't have one.
```

> Note: Do not chmod a `launch.sh` file if you don't have one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Every runtime should have a `start.sh`. So you can remove this

If needed use the `RUN` commands to install any dependencies you require for the build stage.

Next set the permissions for the user you created so your build and run step will have access to them:
```
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/local/src"]
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/code"]
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/workspace"]
RUN ["chown", "-R", "openruntimes:openruntimes", "/usr/builtCode"]

> ```

Reviewer: You can remove this

> Finally, you'll add a `CMD` command. For an interpreted language this should be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, you'll add a `CMD` command for the entrypoint
```

```

> CMD ["/usr/local/src/launch.sh"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CMD ["/usr/local/src/start.sh"]
```

```
Since this will use your launch script when the runtime starts.

For a compiled language this must be:
```
CMD ["tail", "-f", "/dev/null"]
```

> so the build steps can be run.

Reviewer: You can remove this, since we're using the `start.sh` script as the entrypoint for all the runtimes

## 3. Building your Docker image and adding it to the list

> With your runtime successfully created you can now move on to building your docker image and adding it to the script files used for generating all of the image files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With your runtime successfully created you can now move on to building your Docker image and adding it to the script files used for generating all of the image files.
```

> Open up the `/runtimes/buildLocalOnly.sh` script first and add your runtime to it. The following is an example with dart version 2.12

Reviewer: Please update the file name its not this anymore

```
echo 'Dart 2.12...'

> docker build -t dart-runtime:2.12 ./runtimes/dart-2.12

Reviewer: ```suggestion
docker build -t openruntimes/dart:2.12 ./runtimes/dart-2.12
```

```

> Next, open up the `/runtimes/build.sh` script and also add your runtime to it. This one is slightly different as this is the one that will be used for cross-platform compiles and deploying it to Docker hub. The following is an example also with dart version 2.12:

Reviewer: Please revisit this section, we're using `deploy.sh` to deploy 
and the environment variables come from `travis.yml`

In `src/Runtimes/Runtimes` create a new entry in the `__construct()` method in the Runtimes class like so:
```
$dart = new Runtime('dart', 'Dart');
$dart->addVersion('2.12', 'dart-runtime:2.12', 'openruntimes-ubuntu:20.04', [System::X86, System::ARM]);
$this->runtimes['dart'] = $dart;
```
This is an example of what you would do for a compiled language such as dart.

The first line is creating a new language entry, The first parameter is the internal name and the second one is the external one which is what the user will see in projects that use OpenRuntimes such as Appwrite.

The second line adds a new version to the language entry, I'll break down the parameters:
```
1: Version - The version of the runtime you are creating.
2: Build Image - The image used to build the code
3: Run Image - The image used to run the code. 
For interpreted languages, this is normally the same as the Build Image, but for compiled languages, this can be either "openruntimes-alpine:3.13.6" or "openruntimes-ubuntu:20.04"
We recommend using Alpine when possible and using Ubuntu if the runtime doesn't work on Alpine.
4: Platforms Supported - These are the architectures this runtime is available to.
```

> The third line simply adds the new runtime to the main list.

Reviewer: This section as well.. The repo is in appwrite/runtimes at the moment. 

We can comment this section out until we move it to open-runtimes

```
This command adds execution permissions to your script and executes it.

NOTE: If you ever want to repackage your script you can simply run: `./tests/resources/package-LANGUAGE_NAME.sh` in the root of the `php-runtimes` project since you don't have to change permissions more than once.

### 5.3 Adding your runtime to the main testing script
Now you have created your test execution script and have packaged it up for your runtime to execute you can now add it to the main testing script. Open up the `./tests/Runtimes/RuntimesTest.php` file and find the part where we are defining `$this->tests`.

Once you have found this, Add your own entry into this array like so:
```php
'LANGUAGE_NAME-VERSION'  =>  [
    'code'  =>  $functionsDir .  ' /LANGUAGE_NAME.tar.gz',
    'entrypoint'  =>  'Test file', // Replace with the name of the test file you wrote in ./tests/resources/LANGUAGE_NAME
    'timeout'  =>  15,
    'runtime'  =>  'LANGUAGE_NAME-VERSION',
    'tarname'  =>  'LANGUAGE_NAME-VERSION.tar.gz', // Note: If your version has a point in it replace it with a dash instead for this value.
],

> ```

Reviewer: You'll need t rewrite this section, since we've changed the way you run tests.
